README.md, before:

# ipwatch

Sean Begley (begleysm@gmail.com)

https://steamforge.net/wiki

https://github.com/begleysm/ipwatch

2021-08-03

## Description
This program gets your external IP address, checks it against your "saved" IP address and, if a difference is found, emails you the new IP. This is useful for servers at residential locations whose IP address may change periodically due to actions by the ISP.

## Usage Examples
[config] = path to an IPWatch configuration file

1. `python3 ipwatch.py [config]`
2. `./ipwatch.py [config]`
3. `python3 ipwatch.py config.txt`
4. `./ipwatch.py config.txt`
5. `python3 /path/to/dir/ipwatch.py /path/to/dir/config.txt`
6. `./path/to/dir/ipwatch.py /path/to/dir/config/txt`

## Installation
### Debian based Linux systems
Install python3, git, & nano by running
```bash
sudo apt install python3 git nano
```

Clone the ipwatch repo by running
```bash
sudo git clone https://github.com/begleysm/ipwatch /opt/ipwatch
```

Copy `example_config.txt` to `config.txt` by running
```bash
sudo cp /opt/ipwatch/example_config.txt /opt/ipwatch/config.txt
```

Since `config.txt` will contain an email password, make it viewable & editable by `root` only by running
```bash
sudo chmod 600 /opt/ipwatch/config.txt
```

Edit `config.txt` by running the following command and observing the instructions in the **Config File** section below.  If you're using Gmail as your sending mail service then be sure to read the **Gmail** section below.
```bash
sudo nano /opt/ipwatch/config.txt
```

You can test the setup by running
```bash
sudo python3 /opt/ipwatch/ipwatch.py /opt/ipwatch/config.txt
```
Check out the **Cronjob** section below to make this utility run on its own so that you may be quickly alerted to any IP changes on your system.

## Config File
ipwatch uses a config file to define how to send an email.  An example and description is below.  A similar config file is in the repo as example_config.txt.  You should copy it by running something like `sudo cp example_config.txt config.txt` and then modify `config.txt`. It is recommended that you adjust the permissions of your config file so that no one but you and/or root can read it since it will contain the sender email password.

```bash
sender=Bob Sender                    					#this is the name of the email sender
sender_email=bobsender@gmail.com     					#this is the email address the email will be sent from
sender_username=bobsender            					#this is the username (in this example gmail username) of the sender
sender_password=password1            					#this is the password (in this example gmail password) of the sender
receiver=Tom Receiver, Bob Receiver					#this is a comma delimited list of the names of the recipients
receiver_email=tomreceiver@gmail.com, bobreceiver@gmail.com  		#this is a comma delimited lit of the the email addresses of the recipients
subject_line=My IP Has Changed!      					#this is the subject line of the sent email
machine=Test_Machine                 					#this is the name of the machine sending the email
smtp_addr=smtp.gmail.com:587         					#this is the SMTP address for the sending email server (in this case gmail)
save_ip_path=/opt/ipwatch/oldip.txt  					#this is the location where the saved ip address will be stored
try_count=10                         					#this defines how many times the system will try to find the current IP before exiting
ip_blacklist=192.168.0.255,192.168.0.1,192.168.1.255,192.168.1.1	#this is a list of IP address to ignore if received
```

## Cronjob
ipwatch works best when setup as a cronjob.  For the following instructions I assume that you've cloned the ipwatch repo into `/opt/ipwatch` and that your config file is in the same location.  You can access root's crontab by running

```bash
sudo su
crontab -e
```
Below is an example crontab entry to run ipwatch once per hour.

```bash
00 * * * * /opt/ipwatch/ipwatch.py /opt/ipwatch/config.txt
```

If you want to/need to run the cronjob as an unprivileged user you'll have to ensure that your user has execution privileges for `ipwatch.py` and can write to the `save_ip_path` file defined in your config file.  This is probably most easily accomplished by installing *ipwatch* somewhere under your home directory.

## Gmail
### Less secure app access
If you use Gmail as your sending email service then you'll have to enable **Less secure app access** to allow ipwatch to send emails. You can read more about this at https://support.google.com/accounts/answer/6010255.  You can enable **Less secure app access** by visiting https://myaccount.google.com/lesssecureapps.
### Critical security alert
Chances are you'll also be blocked, by Gmail, the first time you try try to send an email and will receive a **Critical security alert** saying that a **Sign-in attempt was blocked for your linked Google Account** at your recovery email/phone #.  You'll have to click the **Check activity** button and say **Yes that was me** in order to whitelist the *ipwatch* machine.
### 2-Step Verification
If you use **2-Step Verification** with Gmail then you'll need configure your Gmail account to **Sign in with App Passwords** which you can learn more about by visiting https://support.google.com/accounts/answer/185833.

## Server List
The server list is hosted in this github repo as `servers.json`.  Locally, there is a cached copy kept which will be re-retrieved from github every 90 days.

## References
The original ipgetter.py code came from https://github.com/phoemur/ipgetter.  However that repo is gone now.  This repo contains an updated copy of the ipgetter.py file that has been modified to further support ipwatch.

Thanks to TheFlyingBadger for adding in support for the GitHub hosted servers.json file.

Commit message:

Updated README.md to include local IP

README.md, after:

# ipwatch

Sean Begley (begleysm@gmail.com)

https://steamforge.net/wiki

https://github.com/begleysm/ipwatch

2022-04-04

## Description
This program gets your external & internal IP addresses, checks them against your "saved" IP addresses and, if a difference is found, emails you the new IP's. This is useful for servers at residential locations whose IP address may change periodically due to actions by the ISP.

## Usage Examples
[config] = path to an IPWatch configuration file

1. `python3 ipwatch.py [config]`
2. `./ipwatch.py [config]`
3. `python3 ipwatch.py config.txt`
4. `./ipwatch.py config.txt`
5. `python3 /path/to/dir/ipwatch.py /path/to/dir/config.txt`
6. `./path/to/dir/ipwatch.py /path/to/dir/config/txt`

## Installation
### Debian based Linux systems
Install python3, git, & nano by running
```bash
sudo apt install python3 git nano
```

Clone the ipwatch repo by running
```bash
sudo git clone https://github.com/begleysm/ipwatch /opt/ipwatch
```

Copy `example_config.txt` to `config.txt` by running
```bash
sudo cp /opt/ipwatch/example_config.txt /opt/ipwatch/config.txt
```

Since `config.txt` will contain an email password, make it viewable & editable by `root` only by running
```bash
sudo chmod 600 /opt/ipwatch/config.txt
```

Edit `config.txt` by running the following command and observing the instructions in the **Config File** section below.  If you're using Gmail as your sending mail service then be sure to read the **Gmail** section below.
```bash
sudo nano /opt/ipwatch/config.txt
```

You can test the setup by running
```bash
sudo python3 /opt/ipwatch/ipwatch.py /opt/ipwatch/config.txt
```
Check out the **Cronjob** section below to make this utility run on its own so that you may be quickly alerted to any IP changes on your system.

## Config File
ipwatch uses a config file to define how to send an email.  An example and description is below.  A similar config file is in the repo as example_config.txt.  You should copy it by running something like `sudo cp example_config.txt config.txt` and then modify `config.txt`. It is recommended that you adjust the permissions of your config file so that no one but you and/or root can read it since it will contain the sender email password.

```bash
sender=Bob Sender                    					#this is the name of the email sender
sender_email=bobsender@gmail.com     					#this is the email address the email will be sent from
sender_username=bobsender            					#this is the username (in this example gmail username) of the sender
sender_password=password1            					#this is the password (in this example gmail password) of the sender
receiver=Tom Receiver, Bob Receiver					#this is a comma delimited list of the names of the recipients
receiver_email=tomreceiver@gmail.com, bobreceiver@gmail.com  		#this is a comma delimited lit of the the email addresses of the recipients
subject_line=My IP Has Changed!      					#this is the subject line of the sent email
machine=Test_Machine                 					#this is the name of the machine sending the email
smtp_addr=smtp.gmail.com:587         					#this is the SMTP address for the sending email server (in this case gmail)
save_ip_path=/opt/ipwatch/oldip.txt  					#this is the location where the saved ip address will be stored
try_count=10                         					#this defines how many times the system will try to find the current IP before exiting
ip_blacklist=192.168.0.255,192.168.0.1,192.168.1.255,192.168.1.1	#this is a list of IP address to ignore if received
```

## Cronjob
ipwatch works best when setup as a cronjob.  For the following instructions I assume that you've cloned the ipwatch repo into `/opt/ipwatch` and that your config file is in the same location.  You can access root's crontab by running

```bash
sudo su
crontab -e
```
Below is an example crontab entry to run ipwatch once per hour.

```bash
00 * * * * /opt/ipwatch/ipwatch.py /opt/ipwatch/config.txt
```

If you want to/need to run the cronjob as an unprivileged user you'll have to ensure that your user has execution privileges for `ipwatch.py` and can write to the `save_ip_path` file defined in your config file.  This is probably most easily accomplished by installing *ipwatch* somewhere under your home directory.

## Gmail
### Less secure app access
If you use Gmail as your sending email service then you'll have to enable **Less secure app access** to allow ipwatch to send emails. You can read more about this at https://support.google.com/accounts/answer/6010255.  You can enable **Less secure app access** by visiting https://myaccount.google.com/lesssecureapps.
### Critical security alert
Chances are you'll also be blocked, by Gmail, the first time you try try to send an email and will receive a **Critical security alert** saying that a **Sign-in attempt was blocked for your linked Google Account** at your recovery email/phone #.  You'll have to click the **Check activity** button and say **Yes that was me** in order to whitelist the *ipwatch* machine.
### 2-Step Verification
If you use **2-Step Verification** with Gmail then you'll need configure your Gmail account to **Sign in with App Passwords** which you can learn more about by visiting https://support.google.com/accounts/answer/185833.

## Server List
The server list is hosted in this github repo as `servers.json`.  Locally, there is a cached copy kept which will be re-retrieved from github every 90 days.

## References
The original ipgetter.py code came from https://github.com/phoemur/ipgetter.  However that repo is gone now.  This repo contains an updated copy of the ipgetter.py file that has been modified to further support ipwatch.

## Thanks
1. Thanks to TheFlyingBadger for adding in support for the GitHub hosted servers.json file.
2. Thanks to pjuster for providing info on Gmail 2-Step Verification.
3. Thanks to carolmanderson for adding in support for monitoring local IP.
